THE STORY OF THE HEIRLOOM LOCKET:



The family-heirloom gold locket contains photos of Jason Oliver and Sarah Oliver.  Sarah and Jason Oliver were both born in Oxfordshire, England, in 1831.  She was the oldest daughter of Thomas Knight, who came from a wealthy family and who had made a fortune in the liquor business.  Sarah’s mother, Abigail, died in childbirth in the 1840’s, and Sarah and her two sisters were raised by servants and educated by tutors on the family estate.

Jason Oliver came from a working-class family and was brought up a Wesleyan Methodist and teetotaler.  The new Temperance movement had societies springing up all over England, and Jason was much in demand to recite poems at their meetings, emphasizing the evils of alcohol.  He was apprenticed to a slate maker, and later became a stone-mason; it was in this capacity that he came to work on the Knight family estate in the 1850’s.  As a labourer, he never should have met or spoken to the Knight children (according to the world-view of their father), but somehow he and Sarah did meet.  They fell in love and wanted to marry, but Thomas Knight refused to give permission, and threatened to disinherit Sarah if the marriage took place.  However, the young couple eloped, and were married in August of 1857.  It’s interesting that while Thomas Knight disapproved of Jason because of the difference in social status, Jason in turn must have disapproved of the Knight family having made their money off the Demon Alcohol.

Sarah and Jason lived in a lowly cottage, and began a life of hard work and frugality, very different from the life she had known.  Sarah was proud of her husband, whom she called “an artisan,” and was totally devoted to him and to their children.  They had two sons, then two daughters, Sarah Anne (Annie) – who was to become the Whiteford sisters’ mother  - born in 1864, and Norah – destined to be my Dad’s mother – born in 1868.

Sarah often suffered with bronchitis, and doctors recommended that the family leave England for a drier climate.  Australia was considered, but they chose Canada.  Sarah wrote to her father and sisters, asking to be allowed to come back to say good-bye before going so far away; one of the sisters replied, saying they would receive Sarah herself, but not her husband or children.  She never went back.

Jason left for Canada first, then Sarah and the children joined him in 1872, traveling steerage.  Jason worked as a stone-mason in Thedford, Ontario, for a few years, then decided to “go out West” and seek a new life.  He walked for hundreds of miles in Manitoba looking for suitable land that was still available for homesteading, and finally found what he wanted: 160 acres free as homestead near what is now the town of Manitou.  Later he got pre-emption: 160 acres for $1 an acre, and a year to pay for it.

The railroad to Winnipeg, built in 1876, went through Emerson, some 60 miles from Jason’s homestead.  Sarah and the children took the train to Emerson in November of 1877, having sent a message to Jason notifying him of their arrival date.  However, no one was there to meet them, and Sarah had to walk the streets asking people how they might get to their homestead.  She met a man who lived on an adjacent farm, and arranged to travel with him, paying him her last $60.  Then this stalwart woman, who had been raised in luxury, climbed onto a load of lumber with her children, sitting in the back of a Red River wagon pulled by oxen, for a bitterly cold, rough ride that took a whole day, “each mile taking her further from any semblance of civilization,” in my Aunt Annie’s words.  It turned out that the message Sarah had sent to her husband arrived after they did; as well, some of their luggage, which had mistakenly gone on to Winnipeg, was never found.  It was an inauspicious beginning to their life as homesteaders.

They arrived at a one-room log house with thatched roof, 12’ x 14’, its floor made of hewed poplar logs with the cracks filled in with mud.  There was a single half-window, with one pane of glass, and a bed built high, with another bed underneath which could be pulled out at night.  The first winter was dismal: the temperature went down to –60° F., the potatoes and onions froze like stones in the little dug-out cellar, the cow didn’t give milk till the following June, and the ink would freeze in Jason’s pen as he sat by the oven door trying to write.  There were many stories of hardship and deprivation over the coming years, but Sarah Oliver was never known to complain, or to express regret for leaving her ancestral home.

In time, things improved.  Jason built a new home: still a log house, but with three rooms on the ground floor and two bedrooms upstairs.  Neighbours filled in nearby homesteads, roads were improved, and a school was built.  Jason traveled a lot to find work as a stone-mason, and the older children also went out to work, so Sarah was often home alone with Norah, the youngest.

Sarah died in 1888, but Jason lived until 1916.  Norah married David Oke, a farmer and part-time preacher, in 1895, and they had five sons (including David Jason Wesley Oke) and a daughter.  There is a photograph of Norah, presumably from the time of her wedding, in which she is wearing the gold locket.  It is possible that the locket was newly made at that time, but I suspect that neither the Olivers nor the Okes could have afforded such a purchase.  It seems more likely to me that the locket was made for Sarah during her years as a privileged daughter of the Knight family, between 1831 and 1857.  In any case, the photos in the locket were obviously taken when Sarah and Jason Oliver were in their later years, so either Sarah (as an adult) or Norah must have chosen and inserted the photos.

When circumstances were difficult, Sarah had often said to her children: “Never mind – someday we will be rich.”  She must have expected to inherit something from the Knight family despite her father’s words, because her two sisters in England had died without having had children.  It wasn’t until the 1920’s that this part of the story reached an end.  The Oliver's grandson David Jason Wesley Oke (known as Wes), then a university student in Alberta, learned of a notice in the Winnipeg Free Press that there was a large sum of money unclaimed in England, forming the estate of a Thos. Knight, brewer, who had been dead for some time.  If no one could establish relationship within a certain time, the money would become the property of the Government.  Wes mentioned this to Prime Minister Meighen (who happened to be his landlady’s brother) and Mr. Meighen offered to find out if there was still time to submit a claim.  Unfortunately for all of us descendants, the deadline had passed, and the estate, valued at $11 million, had already gone into Chancery.


